# WFDB-XML Interchange Tools

**File:** README
**Author:** G. Moody
**Date:** 2 July 2010
**Last revised:** 9 February 2026

## Overview

This directory contains software for interchange between WFDB native formats
and XML formats.

## Files in This Directory

| File | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `wfdb.dtd` | A DTD for WFDB-XML, an XML schema for expressing the contents of WFDB header and annotation files |
| `wfdb.xsl` | An XSLT style sheet that a web browser (or other XSLT engine) can use to transform a WFDB-XML header or annotation file into a human-readable representation of its contents |
| `heaxml.c` | A C program that converts a native WFDB `.hea` file into a WFDB-XML file |
| `annxml.c` | A C program that converts a native WFDB annotation file into a WFDB-XML file |
| `xmlhea.c` | A C program that converts a WFDB-XML header file into a native WFDB `.hea` file |
| `xmlann.c` | A C program that converts a WFDB-XML annotation file into a native WFDB annotation file |
| `xmlproc.h` | Generic functions for processing XML files, shared by `xmlhea` and `xmlann` |
| `Makefile` | A `make` description file for automating the process of compiling and installing this software |

## DTD Location

A copy of the most recent version of `wfdb.dtd` is posted on PhysioNet at
<http://physionet.org/physiobank/database/XML/wfdb.dtd>

This on-line copy is referenced in WFDB-XML files generated by `heaxml`
and `annxml`.

## Requirements

Note that these programs require the WFDB library version 10.5.4 or
later, and that those that read WFDB-XML files also require `libexpat`
(<http://expat.sourceforge.net/>). To compile them, install `gcc`, `make`,
the WFDB software package, and `libexpat` if you have not already done so,
then run `make` from within this directory. If you don't have `make`,
you can compile these programs manually; see `Makefile` for the commands
needed to do so.

## Usage

It is not necessary to download the native WFDB files in order to use
`heaxml` and `annxml`, since they can obtain their inputs directly from
the PhysioNet web server via HTTP.

### Examples

For example, these commands:

```bash
heaxml mitdb/200
annxml mitdb/200 atr
```

produce the WFDB-XML files:
- `mitdb-200.hea.xml`
- `mitdb-200.atr.xml`

in the current directory.

If you put a copy of `wfdb.xsl` in the same directory with these output
files, you should be able to view the HTML generated from them via
`wfdb.xsl` by opening them with Firefox or another web browser that
incorporates an XSLT engine.

### Multi-Segment Records

Try running `heaxml` on a `mimicdb` or `mimic2db` record, for
example like this:

```bash
heaxml mimic2db/a40006/a40006
```

This command produces `mimic2db-a40006-a40006.hea.xml`, which includes information about each segment in the multi-segment record as well as a summary of the entire record. The inverse operation, which can be performed by reading the `.xml` file using `xmlhea`, generates a complete set of segment headers together with the master header in this case.

**Warning:** The XML outputs generated by these commands are huge. There is a
good reason that I don't keep these data in XML format on PhysioBank!

## Signal File Conversion

There are no `datxml` or `xmldat` applications to convert signal files
to and from WFDB-XML format, because the standard `rdsamp` and `wrsamp`
can perform these conversions. Use `rdsamp`'s `-X` option to generate
WFDB-XML output; `wrsamp` can recognize WFDB-XML input automatically, so
no special option is required. WFDB-XML signal format is the CSV format
that can be produced by `rdsamp`'s `-c` option, wrapped within an XML header
and trailer.
